Add Initial Metrics (#325)
aranya-project/aranya: crates/aranya-metrics/README.md

Reviewer: If `protobuf` always needs to be installed to build the tcp exporter, we should mention this in the Aranya project's top-level `README.md`

# Aranya Metrics Collection

As with any project that grows large enough, Aranya has a need for collecting benchmarks and other metrics to see if performance is improving or regressing over time and to get a sense for what could be improved. The `aranya-metrics` crate accomplishes this by providing a "harness" that measures memory, cpu, and disk usage and reporting it through one of several backends.

Future plans to collect more information include:

-   Adding `metrics-rs` into the daemon binary itself to collect additional metrics such as network usage and statistics about how the directed acyclic graph is performing. The provided exporter will need to be hidden behind a feature flag, and any metrics collection should compile out completely with it off.
-   Augmenting existing metrics with more information using key-value pairs, as well as reporting metrics for individual daemons.
-   Extending the above metrics harness with benchmarks using `divan` and [flame graphs](https://www.brendangregg.com/flamegraphs.html) to identify performance bottlenecks and functions that need to be annotated with `#[fastrace::trace]` for better measurement of hotspots.

## Prometheus Exporter

> One of the supported metrics backends allows for communicating with a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) instance. Note that with the way that Prometheus works, a datapoint is only created once the data is scraped, so any data created locally that gets overwritten before being scraped is lost. This can either be letting the main Prometheus backend scrape data from the exporter which is meant for longer running data, or using a `pushgateway` with a unique job name to easily filter out specific runs, which is meant more for short runs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the supported metrics backends allows for communicating with a [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) instance. Note that with the way that Prometheus works, a datapoint is only created once the data is scraped, so any data created locally that gets overwritten before being scraped is lost. This can either be letting the main Prometheus backend scrape data from the exporter which is meant for longer running data, or using a `pushgateway` with a unique job name to easily filter out specific runs, which is meant for shorter runs.
```

Alternatively, you can run `cargo make metrics-prometheus` which will spin up a `pushgateway` and run the example. Once that's done and you have the job name (i.e. `aranya_demo_1751415368`), the easiest way to view the data is to go to Prometheus (`localhost:9090`), query for the job (`{job="aranya_demo_1751415368"}`), go to the graph tab, adjust the timescale to one where you can see the whole run, and you can click and drag to select a smaller range. Make sure to change the resolution to whatever your scrape interval is (the above config sets it to 100ms). You can then filter specific metrics using the list below the graph.

## Technical Details

Due to `sysinfo` only providing percentages of CPU usage at each refresh instead of raw user time/system time, we use `proc_pidinfo` on MacOS to grab the raw CPU time and memory usage, using sysinfo for file I/O. `proc_pidinfo` captures information "at the current moment" which means there isn't really a delta, whereas sysinfo's bytes_read/written is "since last refresh" so we have to aggregate it along with all previous deltas.

> The PIDs being tracked include "client", which is an `aranya-client` instance (plus metrics overhead), as well as five `aranya-daemon` instances ("owner", "admin", "operator", "member_a", and "member_b"), which are created as sub-processes using `Command::spawn()` (`proc_pidinfo` can do weird stuff if you don't have permissions to access another process's info).

Reviewer: Typically we would run 1 client per daemon instance rather than a single client that interacts with multiple daemons.

Author: Oh, I probably misunderstood what ClientCtx is doing then, I think you're right.

# Aranya Metrics Collection

As with any project that grows large enough, Aranya is now able to collect various metrics to measure performance and find areas to target for improvement. This is accomplished in several ways:

-   Benchmarks that use `divan` to measure runtime and memory usage
-   The `aranya-metrics` crate that adds a harness on top of Aranya code that's representative of typical operation in order to see how the entire stack performs in that scenario. This includes cpu time, memory usage, and disk usage.

Future plans to support more information include:

-   Adding `metrics-rs` into more areas of Aranya to measure performance directly, with an optional recorder enabled to actually collect and display those values. Note that `metrics-rs` is designed to be lightweight enough that without a recorder, the performance impact is negligible.
-   Adding more granular metrics, using key-value pairs to report the data from specific daemon instances.

> -   Using the above `divan` benchmarks, as well as [flame graphs](https://www.brendangregg.com/flamegraphs.html) to narrow down specific functions to augment with `#[fastrace::trace]` for measuring hot spots for improvements.

Reviewer: Could use the phrase "identify performance bottlenecks" here in relation to the flame graph

-   Adding a `metrics-rs` recorder and `fastrace` reporter to the daemon binary behind a feature flag to enable collecting metrics in production.

# Installation Instructions

> Make sure [homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is installed, and then install the following packages:

Reviewer: This step only applies for MacOS

Author: As discussed in I forget what meeting, this is the bare minimum to get this up and running, I'm not expecting anyone other than tech people (preferably only our team) who should know that homebrew is MacOS-only to read this

-   [brew install prometheus](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/prometheus), which installs [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), an open source metrics collection backend.
-   [brew install grafana](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/grafana), which will install [Grafana](https://grafana.com/), an open source frontend to better visualize our metrics.

Download the correct package for the [`pushgateway`](https://prometheus.io/download/#pushgateway) since it's not available on `homebrew`, extract it, and `sudo cp pushgateway /usr/local/bin/` to install it as a tool.

Modify the Prometheus config file at `/opt/homebrew/etc/prometheus.yml` (or `/usr/local/etc/prometheus.yml`) to the following, to add `pushgateway` and `node_exporter` support:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: I would rather manage this file as its own file in this repo that's referenced from the README, rather than inline.
Then the reader can easily run something like this:
`cp <aranya repo>/crates/aranya-metrics/prometheus.yml /opt/homebrew/etc/prometheus.yml`
Version controlling the file separately from the README is a bit more manageable.

global:
    # By default, Prometheus will scrape data from our endpoints every 15 seconds
    scrape_interval: 15s

scrape_configs:
    # Prometheus runs on localhost:9090
    - job_name: "prometheus"
      static_configs:
          - targets: ["localhost:9090"]

    # Our pushgateway runs on localhost:9091, and we scrape it every 100ms
    - job_name: "pushgateway"
      static_configs:
          - targets: ["localhost:9091"]
      scrape_interval: 100ms
      honor_labels: true # Important
```

Finally, install the above as long-running services:

-   `brew services start prometheus`
-   `brew services start grafana`

Grafana can be accessed at `https://localhost:3000/`, sign-in by default is `admin:admin`.

# Collecting Metrics

The easiest way to do an `aranya-metrics` run is to simply call `cargo make metrics`, which will compile the daemon and this crate, spin up a `pushgateway`, run the example, and close everything.

> After that's done and you have the job name (i.e. `aranya_demo_1751415368`), the easiest way to view the data is to go to Prometheus (`localhost:9090`), query for the job (`{job="aranya_demo_1751415368"}`), go to the graph tab, adjust the timescale to one where you can see the whole run, and you can click and drag to select a smaller range. Make sure to change the resolution to whatever your scrape interval is (the above config sets it to 100ms). You can then selectively look at categories using the list below the graph.

Reviewer: We will want a way to view metrics in CI without opening a Prometheus GUI. Printing the values to the command line is something we can reference later after the CI run completes.

-   Adding more granular metrics, using key-value pairs to report the data from specific daemon instances.
-   Using the above `divan` benchmarks, as well as [flame graphs](https://www.brendangregg.com/flamegraphs.html) to narrow down specific functions to augment with `#[fastrace::trace]` for measuring hot spots for improvements.
-   Adding a `metrics-rs` recorder and `fastrace` reporter to the daemon binary behind a feature flag to enable collecting metrics in production.

# Installation Instructions

Make sure [homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is installed, and then install the following packages:

-   [brew install prometheus](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/prometheus), which installs [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/), an open source metrics collection backend.
-   [brew install grafana](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/grafana), which will install [Grafana](https://grafana.com/), an open source frontend to better visualize our metrics.

> Download the correct package for the [`pushgateway`](https://prometheus.io/download/#pushgateway) since it's not available on `homebrew`, extract it, and `sudo cp pushgateway /usr/local/bin/` to install it as a tool.

Reviewer: After installing `pushgateway` and attempting to run it I got this error:
“pushgateway” cannot be opened because the developer cannot be verified.

We should add a note about allowing this to run on MacOS: https://support.apple.com/en-us/102445
